Doda is a town and a notified area committee in Doda district in the Indian state of Jammu and Kashmir. Doda is a district in eastern part of Jammu region of the Indian state of Jammu and Kashmir. It is the third largest district in Jammu and Kashmir after Leh and Kargil. Doda acquired the status of a district when it was carved out of the erstwhile district of Udhampur in 1948. Lying in the middle and outer Himalayan ranges, the district has mostly a hilly terrain. In view of its vastness and due to the inconvenience faced by people living in its far-flung areas and for making the whole area administratively manageable, the State Government, in July, 2006, trifurcated the district into the districts namely Doda, Ramban and Kishtwar. The district is surrounded by Anantnag district of Kashmir Division on its north, Kishtwar district in the northeast, Chamba area of Himachal Pradesh in the south, Kathua district in the south, Udhampur district in the southwest and Ramban district in the west. Some of the important neighbourhoods are Nagri, Akramabad, Sah Mohallah, Faridya Mohallah, Mughal Road (New Hospital Road), Bharath Road, Bus stand, Tondwah, Khalil Abad, Nai Basti, etc.


Doda is located at 33°08′N 75°34′E﻿ / ﻿33.13°N 75.57°E﻿ / 33.13; 75.57.[1] It has an Average Elevation of 1,107&#160;metres (3631&#160;feet). Due to its varying physical features, Doda does not have a uniform climate, Total area of Distt. Doda is 4500&#160;km2.(approx.). Doda District has been carved out from the erstwhile District Udhampur in 1948. The State Govt. on July 2006 trifurcated the district into three districts namely Doda, Ramban and Kishtwar. Lying in the outer Himalayan range in J&amp;K State, the district falls between 32 degree-53’ and 34 degree 21’ north latitude and 75 degree-1' and 76 degree-47' east longitude. On its north is Anantnag District of Kashmir Division, District Kishtwar in the North-East, while south-west and south are bordered by the Districts of Udhampur, Kathua and Chamba area of Himachal Pradesh. On its west is District Ramban.From east and south-east is Leh District There are most famous mountain peaks in District Doda like Marble Pass, Nunkun on the Suru Border which rise to a height of 2300&#160;ft.above sea level. Two other famous peaks are Brahma and Moon Sikle. .
Köppen-Geiger climate classification system classifies its climate as humid subtropical
Doda district has a rich history. The district is named after its largest town, Doda. It is said that one of the ancient Rajas of Kishtwar whose dominion extended beyond Doda persuaded one utensil maker Deeda, a migrant from Multan (now in Pakistan), to settle permanently in this territory and set up an utensil factory there. Deeda is said to have settled in a village which later on was called with his name. With the passage of time the name Deeda has changed into Doda, the present name of the town.
The entire area of district, including Allaqa Dengbatal (Tehsil Mahore), was initially divided into two independent jagirs (principalities) of Kishtwar and Bhaderwah.
Kishtwar State consisted of some areas of the present District Doda viz., Doda-Siraj excluding present Bhaderwah, Bhallessa and Thathri Tehsils, Marmat Galihan, Raggi, Assar, Batote areas of Doda and Ramban Districts.
The principality of Bhaderwah was distributed into 15 tharas or administrative units. The total area of Bhaderwah Jagir (including Bhalessa etc.) was 533 sq. miles which after delimitation of Udhampur district in 1931 was reduced to 213 sq. miles only. From 1112 CE to 1930 CE the Bhaderwah Jagir remained under the control of different Rajas.
Its name as private Jagir was changed to Private Domain and in charge jagir was changed to Director Private Domains. On the recommendations of Private Domain Assimilation Committee, the status of Bhaderwah ended in 1930. Consequently Bhaderwah became a Tehsil of Udhampur district in 1931. After the carving out of district Doda from district Udhampur in 1948, Bhaderwah became a Tehsil of District Doda. Consequent upon reorganization of District, Naibat Tahthri and Niabat Bhalessa of Bhaderwah Tehsil also became full-fledged Tehsils in 1981.
As of 2011[update] India census,[4] Doda had a population of 25,527. Males constitute 64% of the population and females 36%. Doda has an average literacy rate of 5% higher than the Indian national average of 59.5%: male literacy is 85% and, female literacy is 61%. In Doda, 10% of the population is under 6 years of age.
Current MLA of Doda is Mr. Shakti Parihar and MLC Mr. Khalid Najeeb Suharwardy from National conference Party.[5]
The District is known, not only for its rich cultural heritage and ethical values but also popular for its age-old traditions of secularism and the spirit of tolerance, which have been since times immemorial, binding the people together. The peaceful co-existence in this vast district has been possible only because of the observance in letter and spirit of these traditions which have since long been guiding the very destinies of the people professing varied faiths.
According to Dr. G.A.Fierson the word "Pahari" applies to the groups of languages spoken in the sub-himalayan hills extending from Bhaderwah to the eastern parts of the Nepal. The Bhaderwah group includes three dialects, viz Bhaderwahi, Bhalesvi and Padri. Bhaderwahi language is abundantly rich in words, phrases and idioms.
Islam entered the region of Doda when Hazrat Shah Farid-ud-Din came over to Doda via Dengbattal and Ramban in 1650 CE. He stayed at Doda for 14 long years and then left for Kishtwar.
The District is having mixed culture and the people of the city Speaking kashmiri. Because of its connectivity with Srinagar, Jammu, Himachal Pradesh and Ladakh, the people are generally speaking Kashmiri, Ladakhi, Dogri,and some Pehari languages like Bhaderwahi, Kishtwari and Serazi. The people are also credited to have unity in diversity. For example, besides regional languages, there are about one dozen languages being spoken in different areas. These are Kashmiri, Dogri, Bhaderwahi, Kishtwari, Siraji, Pogli, Khashali, Gojri, Paddri and Panjabi etc.
&gt;
Tuition Centres in Doda
0. Dak Banglow
1. Main Bazar near Jamia Masjid
2. Old Hospital near bus stand
3. Bharat road
4. Astan Mohallah
5. Balwan Mohallah
6. Shinal Mohallah
7. Faridabad
8. New Hospital
9. Nagri (old name Batoriyal)
10. College Road
11. ItI Road
12. Akramabad
14. Parmaz
15. New basti
16. Bati Mohallah
18. Hamza Colony
19. Sadiq abad
20. Irfan abad
21. Batpoura
22. Bundoda
23. Tundwah
24. Mini sectrait
25.munshi moholla
26.Iqbalabad nagri
