Leonardo Losno Velozo & Chris Pool

1. WordNet relations.

a) how many nouns refer to a relative? 
	Score for relative = 6 (mother ,wife ,father ,father ,child ,child)

b) how many nouns refer to an illness?
	Score for illness = 1 (disease)

c) how many nouns refer to a science?
	Score for science = 3 (mathematics ,science ,science)


2. Multiple classes.
a) in how many cases was there only one hypernym per noun? Give a couple of
examples, indicating the noun and its hypernym

	in 7 cases there was only one hypernym. For example computer > artifact and adult > animal,fauna

b) in how many cases did your system had to choose among more than one possible
hypernyms? Give a couple of examples, and specify which hypernyms were
available

	in 24 cases there where more possible hypernyms. For example death > state,condition|event,happening|act,action activity|attribute,property|process & capability > cognition,knowledge|attribute,property|state,condition

c) what is the average number of hypernyms per noun in the whole text?
	the average number of hypernyms per noun is 2.27

3. WordNet similarity.1
Use one or more of the predefined similarity measures in the NLTK corpus reader for
WordNet to score the similarity of each of these word pairs. Rank the pairs in order
of decreasing similarity and discuss how close your ranking is to the one obtained
experimentally by Miller and Charles. 

	Our results:
	car<> automobile : 3.6375861597263857
	coast<> shore : 2.9444389791664407
	monk<> slave : 2.0281482472922856
	moon<> string : 1.6916760106710724
	food<> fruit : 1.3350010667323402
	journey<> car : 0.7472144018302211

	Their results:
	car-automobile 3.92
	coast-shore 3.70
	food-fruit 3.08
	journey-car 1.16
	monk-slave 0.55
	moon-string 0.08

	Monk-slave and moon-string are not related if you ask the opinion of people but in WordNet they have the same Hypernym (Person). Journey-car do not have the same hypernym but are related to each other if you ask the opinion of people.


Exercise 2 – Named Entity Recognition

1. run the Named Entity Recognizer on your file, and count how many Persons, Organizations,
and Locations you find. Have a look at them - are they all correct?
	LOCATION(1): England
	PERSON(19): Lovelace ,Charles ,Babbage's ,Lovelace ,Lord ,Byron ,Anne ,Isabella ,Byron ,Ada ,Ada ,Byron ,Ada ,Ada ,Charles ,Babbage, ,Luigi ,Menabrea ,Babbage
	ORGANIZATION(3): Augusta ,Ada ,Byron

	The organizations are not correct, they are persons. The rest is correct.

2. as you can see there are only three Named Entity classes. Have a look at the other
models that are contained in the directory of the stanford tagger that you have downloaded
and then used in nltk, and combining this information with what you find at
the link provided above, experiment with other classification sets. Please, comment on
what the other classifiers do, and on what happens.

	ner/classifiers/english.all.3class.distsim.crf.ser.gz
	This classifiers uses ORGANIZATION, LOCATION, PERSON categories 
	This classfier correctly classifies most persons but recognized less words in the other two categories compared to the other classifiers.

	ner/classifiers/english.conll.4class.distsim.crf.ser.gz
	This classifiers uses ORGANIZATION, LOCATION, PERSON, MISC categories
	This classfier classifies some words in the MISC category but some are actually persons or locations 

	ner/classifiers/english.muc.7class.distsim.crf.ser.gz
	This classifiers uses ORGANIZATION, LOCATION, PERSON, TIME, MONEY, PERCENT, DATE categories
	In the text the classifier did not find words for the MONEY, TIME, PERCENT categories


	ner/classifiers/english.nowiki.3class.distsim.crf.ser.gz
	This classifiers uses ORGANIZATION, LOCATION, PERSON categories
	The results are almost the same as the first classifier. This classifier excludes wiki information. 


3. pick the model you prefer, and using both the NER tagger and WordNet information,
classify all nouns or NP chunks in the text using the classes expressed by your classifier
(for example, picking the classifier from the box above, this would mean classifying all
nouns or NP chunks into one of Person, Organization, Location.)

	We have chosen these categories, using the 3-class classifier and wordnet:

	ORGANIZATION(3): Augusta ,Ada ,Byron
	PERSON(19): Lovelace ,Charles ,Babbage's ,Lovelace ,Lord ,Byron ,Anne ,Isabella ,Byron ,Ada ,Ada ,Byron ,Ada ,Ada ,Charles ,Babbage, ,Luigi ,Menabrea ,Babbage
	STATE ,CONDITION(8): disease ,set ,interest ,society ,insanity ,relationship ,capability ,friendship
	COMMUNICATION(2): history ,article
	ATTRIBUTE ,PROPERTY(10): bitter ,disease ,set ,history ,interest ,society ,insanity ,relationship ,capability ,friendship
	EVENT ,HAPPENING(7): set ,technology ,algorithm ,interest ,work ,vision ,effort
	LOCATION(1): England
	FOOD(1): bitter
	RELATION(4): bitter ,interest ,article ,relationship
	GROUP ,COLLECTION(3): interest ,set ,society
	SUBSTANCE(2): bitter ,mother
	ACT ,ACTION ,ACTIVITY(6): set ,technology ,algorithm ,interest ,work ,effort
	TIME(1): history
	PROCESS(4): bitter ,set ,vision ,work
	LOCATION ,PLACE(1): work
	POSSESSION(1): interest


